---
title: 'Städjans edelweiss'
description: 'meta description of the page'
---


::content-header
Städjans edelweiss
::

:content-img{imgSrc="stadjan_05.png"}

<br>

::content-text

*“It all began in the
late 1970s when an Italian-born man named Ido Poloni wanted to bring with him to
Sweden a dear memory from his homeland, the fabled edelweiss plant. After a
summer stay at Foskdalsvallen in Särna, he found it natural to choose Dalarna's
perhaps most alpine location for the planting attempt, namely Städjan's peak.
Bringing about 20  plants from Cortina in northern Italy, Ido planted edelweiss
on suitable rocks that resembled their natural habitat. Here the noble flower
also found itself at home and is still growing on some of Städjan's rock
ledges.”*

<br>

In search for Ido Poloni's transplanted Italian edelweiss, we
made a field trip to the Städjan-Nipfjället national reserve in west Sweden close to the Norweigan border,
on traditional Sámi territory. While the flower is commonly treasured as
a symbol of alpine nationalism and as a trophy of heroic mountaineering, this
context appeared strangely inverted. Here, located on the ledge of a
comparatively accessible summit and insubordinately introduced by a migrant, the
flower hardly serves neither as a symbol of athletic bravery nor of environmental
authenticity. Rather it appears as an ecological and cultural intruder, and as
such provokes a few questions about contemporary conservation and belonging.

<br>

*“Most of us are appalled when
foreign humans are treated as somehow intrinsically dangerous. Yet the
orthodoxy in conservation is to demonize foreign species in just that way.” -Fred
Pearce (The New Wild)*

<br>

::content-img{imgSrc="stadjan_04.png"}
*“The County Administrative Board did not take kindly to Ido Poloni's planting of edelweiss. 
    But nothing had been mentioned about planting new plants in the reserve regulations, so the 
    authorities had to bite the bullet and let the alpine plant remain, to Falu-Kuriren's delight. 
    However, the regulations that apply today prohibit all planting of plants and animals 
    (if someone would think of introducing wall crawlers, chamois or marmots). This additionally 
    applies to most of the county's nature reserves.”* [^1]
::

<br>

  It's easy to depict, as the local
newspaper did in the 70's, the planting attempt as a romantic folly in discord
with an institutional rational. But what if the state bureaucracy is
the one clinging on to a romantic idea of nature and place? The 1970's environmental
movement, including its later expression in governmental policy, was characterised by
protectionism: an approach to conservation that emphasises the protection of
individual species within environments where they're considered to belong. The
idea leans on the conception of the existence of an original or pristine state
of ecosystems; an idea that still lingers in many minds and regulations.
And as environmental journalist Fred Pearce states in his book the New Wild, when we
imagine the world as made up of tightly knit ecosystems that are perfect and
stable, where every species has evolved to have a unique roll, there is little
room for any appreciation for alien species. Despite how hard it is to unlearn, the understanding of ecosystems
as stable and balanced is wrong. Change itself is not the threat but rather the baseline, or as
Pearce would pose it, perhaps even a salvation. While it's true that in some instances
alien species cause havoc to ecosystems, the dull reality is that most of the
time often-feared foreign species don't make the headlines at all. They rarely
outcompete local species, instead they usually either become incorporated as contributors
to the overall health of ecosystems: pollinating crops, spreading seeds, and positively
mingling with native species in the food chain. Or they fail to properly
establish themselves and gradually cease away, which seems to be the case with
the edelweiss on Mount Städjan. 

<br>

 After a few hours of surveying the
characteristic volcano-shaped summit we eventually packed in without a glimpse
of the flower. Perhaps we didn't search behind the right rock, or perhaps they
have already disappeared. As Städjan is well frequented by hikers, it's also not
unlikely that they have succumbed to death by picking. Indeed, long before
climate change began to threaten the existence of edelweiss in the Alps, hikers
desire to collect trophies from their endeavours caused it to rapidly decline
and is the reason (both for being cherished and threatened by this same admiration)
to why it attained
protected status in the 1878, in what is known as one of the first
environmental protection laws in Europe. A law whose purpose was perhaps
more localist commercial than it was environmental, as it intended to preserve
the flower in the interests of local collectors.

<br>

:content-img{imgSrc="stadjan_03.png"}

<br>

On our way back down, we noticed some chickens among the rocks. On closer inspection
we realised they were ptarmigans, a relic from the last ice age and one of few
birds that can be classified as real specialists of the arctic-alpine zone. In
the Alps, the ptarmigans are among the first animal species to be impacted by
global warming and most of its habitat is threatened, partly because of the direct
warming of the region, but also because ski
resorts plan to move further up the mountains where the ptarmigans might otherwise seek refuge. Interestingly, to
make another connection between the Swedish peak and its nearby ski slopes and
the Alps; at least in the short term, the Scandinavian
ski industry considers climate change not a threath but an opportunity. Because of its delayed
effect in the north, the scandinavian resorts predict an increase in activity and profit as its competitors in the Alps begin to struggle. Hence, the tourist might also migrate north.

::
[^1]: From Falu-Kuriren 16/12 1978.